# Lessons

## Speak through action

From the Enchiridion [@enchiridion-gutenberg], #46:

```{.email include=src/enchiridion/enchiridion.txt startLine=1095 endLine=1112}
```

This also really reminds me of #22, which I quoted earlier at the very start of
this. Another reason why I'm hesitant to write this at all - this lesson that
it is better to show your intention through action.

Rather than vomit up the grass to show what good sheep they have been, or in my
case, vomit up whatever philosophical teachings / lessons that are in fashion,
it is better to actually try and **live** these actions to show their merit,
and indeed speak nothing of them.

So, as much as I write here, I must always keep in mind that if I am not
actually living these lessons, I am just like the sheep as I vomit up the
lessons, rather than produce the "wool" of their teachings outwardly.

I think that this teaching also helps to be skeptical of others who preach, but
do not even practice what they preach. It also adds helps to remain skeptical
of anyone preaching anything in general - if they really wanted to convince the
stoic, they should simply live as they would preach others to do so.

I think that Diogenes [@diogenes-of-sinope], an early Cynic that probably helped
to influence Stoic philosophy even before it was yet to form, is an interesting
example to analyze for this.

He did appear to truly live the ascetic lifestyle that he professed to, but he
also was very bold and eager to point the finger at others who he felt were
less virtuous. There are even accounts of him bursting into houses uninvited to
tell others how they were living wrong, slaves to their possessions, and other
Cynic doctrine.

I don't want to be like Diogenes (though I do admire his persistence), so to
the greatest extent that I can I will avoid having a "supercilious look", and
keep to my own affairs, unless someone asks me about my Philosophical thinking
and struggles.

## Is it within my power?

Excerpt from the Enchiridion [@enchiridion-gutenberg], #1:

```{.email include=src/enchiridion/enchiridion.txt startLine=411 endLine=417}
```

This is probably the most famous, and "number one hit" of the Enchiridion. Many
know it as the "Serenity prayer", and as I learned in [@goodreads-how-to-be-a-stoic]
many other cultures have had similar sentiments expressed throughout history.

As stated here, I think that this is a very helpful framework. Like others
though, I think that the idea could use a bit of an update. I don't believe
that it's a perfectly clean dichotomy - I think that the "Trichotomy Of Choice"
[@goodreads-a-guide-to-the-good-life] that William Irvine discusses gets it
right. There is an important third distinction: things which we have some, but
not complete, control over.

A cannot influnce if I get a promotion, that **is** truly outside of my
control. That doesn't mean that I should not work hard, that I should not do
everything within my power to **deserve** a promotion. Thus, I should set my
goal on doing the best work I can, and enjoying it. This is just an example of
course, but I think is good advice in general. By setting the goal to something
that is actually within my power - doing my best work, I cannot be disappointed
if something that is external to my power - getting a promotion, doesn't
manifest.

I feel the same is true of romantic relationships. When I have most been
rejected in the past, it was because I had set as a goal to win someone over. I
was so concetrated on trying to be the best person that I thought they wanted
me to be, I didn't actually concentrate on being the best **me** that I could
be. Once I did that, rejection was less painful and I was more willing to take
another swing at things. I couldn't affect if I was rejected or not, I could
only do my best, try to roll with the punches, and be better for next time.

The quote in its entirety:


```{.email include=src/enchiridion/enchiridion.txt startLine=411 endLine=444}
```
