# Original Sources

While there are a number of great books that provide modern interpretations
of ancient Stoic philosophy, I felt the need to read these original sources
myself to better understand the nature of Stoicism.

## Epictetus

Epictetus simply means "Gained" or "Acquired", as Epictetus was a (freed)
slave. He may have had a name, but if he did it was lost to history.

We don't have any of his actual writings either, but we do have the writing of
one of his studenst, Arrian of Nicomedia, who is generally considered a pretty
reptable source, and who tried to preserve the fidelity of the original
teachings of Epictetus.

Epictetus was a student of Musonius Rufus [@musonius-rufus], and so much of
Epictetus' Stoic Philosophy was likely influenced by and built upon these
teachings.

### The Enchiridion

The Enchiridion is Arrian's compilation of Epictetus "best hits", and a pretty
concise distillation of a lot of the material that is covered in the rest of
the discourses.

[@enchiridion-gutenberg]


### Discourses

There were supposedly 8 volumes of the discoruses, but 4 have been lost to
time. This is a real shame, but what remains is very insightful. Much of this
is greater detail of lessons from the Enchiridion, and a more conversational
approach to philosophical discussion and lessons.

[@epictetus-discourses] from [@discourses-epictetus-source]

[@epictetus-discourses-matheson]

## Musonius Rufus

I haven't yet been able to find easy access to original writings of Musonius.

[@musonius-rufus]

## Seneca

Seneca has a series of letters that I'v purchased the audiobook for, but have
not yet listened to.

## Marcus Aurelius

These [@meditations-gutenberg] are the reflections that the Roman Emperor,
considered by many historians to be "the last good Emperor" of Rome. He wrote
these to himself, titled: "Ta eis heauton", literally meaning "things to one's
self". It was discovered after his death, and published most commonly as just
"Meditations".

I had originally tried to start directly with the Meditations [@meditations-gutenberg]
by Marcus Aurelius, but felt that even with my interest in Ancient Rome, I
still had a hard time easily understanding it without more context. I found
that Epitetus' Enchiridion was a much better starting point, as it was written
to be an actual handbook, but I imagine that reading Marcus Aurelious will be
quite insightful, as he is often held up as a, if not the, iconic Stoic.

I haven't actually gotten through this yet, but I've heard it referenced quite
extensively in [@goodreads-a-guide-to-the-good-life]. I believe that
[@goodreads-the-obstacle-is-the-way] is meant to be a modern distillation of
this, but until I've read the original I can't meaningfully comment on to what
fidelity it is presented with.
