
# Why Stoicism

On reflection, some of the aspects of Stoicism where things I had come upon on
my own. For instance, I already practiced reflection of the day's events, and
negative visualization. Stoic teachings have helped me to provide more
structure, intention, and reasoning to these existing habits, and allow me to
exert more control over them, and not the opposite way around.

In other aspects, I found the advice to be things I intuitively agreed with,
but had not yet come upon or internalized. These are where I must expend the
most effort and intention, as I am more at odds with my nature here in some
cases. For instance, I must daily remind myself to only dwell on those things
which are within my control, and remind myself how best to assess this.

It could be that Stoicism is just a phase for me, a step towards something
else - this has certainly been the pattern in my life. I am hopeful that I'll
be able to stick with this, as it feels to just "fit" in certain ways that
other ways of living that I've tried. Up until now, this has mostly been a
combination of improvising and (sometimes-) enlightened hedonism.

# My path to Stoicism

// FIXME probably cut this out to separate doc, it is self involved and
// rambling, anyone interested can find it on their own.

This is my own story, as best as I can reason and as much as I'm willing to
share. Perhaps you will have some parallels, perhaps you won't. Either way, I
hope that sharing how I arrived on it may help you in some way. I have put this
bit last, as I feel it is longer and more difficult - by its very nature - to
not degrade to something utterly self-involved. Any readers who have yet to
make it this far will be spared at least, and this gives me some measure of
comfort.

## Studying History

Gaius Marius was a character that struck me as inspiring and I leader that I
wanted to emulate. When listening to Dan Carlin's Death Throws of the Republic,
edition of his Hardcore History podcast, he spoke of him in a way that I found
really held him up as an admirable leader.

What I respected about Gaius Marius was that he would get down on the level of
his "Marius Mules" as they were nicknamed, as they would all march in full gear
to train and harden themselves, but because he would do it also they were
motivated to do so. He lead by example. He did not dine in a special fancy tent
with the officers, but with the men of his army, eating what they ate.

I intuited that Gaius Marius had Stoic qualities, just by other examples of
people that I had known to behave "Stoically". I don't know much about his own
connection to stoicism however, but he has inspired me all the same.
Unfortunately I didn't actually have much material to draw on other than a few
historical anecdotes about him. As I kept listening to the podcast, I kept an
eye out for other leadership icons, and other lessons to be learned.

I found other models throughout history, both through the podcast and the
historical parables in many of Robert Greene's books. This included both those
whom I did and explicitly did **not** want to emulate. I found this model of
analyzing stories (which is the common narrative approach Robert Greene uses
throughout a lot of his books) to work pretty well for me. Having a story to
illustrate a lesson is a helpful mnemonic trick, and have noticed that a lot of
authors use it in some way to get their point across.

With this collection of stories though, I had to interpret and decide when to
apply them, while trying to keep their essence in mind. This is a lot to
juggle, and makes for a pretty complex framework. It's not always clear when
the lesson of a story applies well, or if I even interpreted the story
properly.

What was lacking, I think, in this approach was structure. Narrative ideas are
great for illustrating details, but I really wanted a framework, a core set of
simple rules, to call back to. I feel these stories now help to weave together
the details and provide color, where the framework of stoic philosophy serves
as the structure that ties it together.

Rather than trying to keep in mind Robert Greene's laws on... whatever, I find
Epictetus gives a much more concise and refactored rules of living, but the
parables apply to these just as well with a little interpretation.

## Burnout

I burned out

http://lindsaybraman.com/burnout/

## Subtle Art of Not Giving a Fuck

## The Laws of Human Nature

## How to be a Stoic

One day I reflected that I didn't **really** know what 

# Other resources

* Farnam Street Media stoic reading list [@farnam-street-stoic-reading-list]
